### Speaker notes

## Slide 1 
Starting this project, I found the topic "Systems" most apealing - not that I did not like the others, but I felt they were to complicated for me. I believe, I work best by exploring small details, nuances and relationships inside a narrow scope. As I started researching for possible themes and ideas, I discovered quite some interesting topics that could make for great visualizations. 
 - First, I spent some time with energinet.dk which monitors (among other things) the flow of energy source productions, export and import in Denmark and between the countries nearby. After some time I realised the visualization I dreamt of already was there on the front page.
- I went on to explore a large collection of images from an image recognition project which would let cameras detect weeds during farming. I had an idea to visualize the weeds life in a timelapse inspired animation, but eventually ended up discarding all this. 

## Slide 2:
I moved on to another topic, this time about coral reefs. This slide was the first investigation of the Nasa data set, and I tried to get a grasp of the d3 geo package by plotting the corals (x,y) position and the coral bleach by color. This data set was really huge and kept information of the whole planet for each day/month/year. I imagined I had to use a whole other toolset to handle this set, finding the right spatial data structures and implement things that I (and maybe not JavaScript) was not capable of. I was overwhelmed by this data set, but the topic of corals stuck with me.

## Slide 3:
I finally decided on another data set of corals, which had a fitting size (43k entries). I was visually drawn to this topic, because of the corals beatiful colors shapes, and believe they could make great visualizations. This data set had a lot of interesting variables, mostly quantitative such as coral cover and coral bleach but also data of qualitative character, such as the corals exposure and descriptions of the coral reefs. The data also included a lot of temperature metrics that was used in a recent dissertation by Shannon Elizabeth Sully called "Coral Bleaching: A Global Analysis of Bright Spots". I felt somewhat behind in my project process, and started to brainstorm sketches for the data set I have now decided on. On the slide, I decided to proceed with a mixture of idea 1 and 3, the idea being circles as corals, temperature on y axis and time on the x axis.

## Slide 4: 
First digital sketch. I began plotting this with d3 and was surprised how much it actually looked like I planned. However, I really wanted to move on from this "gridy" feeling and possibly have it look more hand-drawn.      

## Slide 5:
The MVP. To move away from the grid, I tried use the the d3-force tool, which led the coral entries towards their (x,y) in the grid but without overlapping. Each coral (circle) is clickable for more information on the specific coral. Working with small multiples, I felt that this approach would do each coral justice. The story I wanted to tell, was that "through the last decades, corals have decreased in coral cover and increased in coral bleach on a global scale, because of rising temperatures caused by climate change". Unfortunately, I had a feeling that this visualization did not really convey this story, as it was not super clear that this tendancy was even present. 

## Slide 6: 
It was time to go some steps back in the process, as I did not know if I could express this narrative from the data set I had. I decided to read the actual dissertation done with the data, looking for positive associations in the variables and if they concluded anything from their research. After some more reading, I decided to change the focus of the story to be about "bright spots" characteristics. These are spots where corals do better than expected and have the potential to survive through climate change (as opposed to dark spots). Slide: Some more editing done towards the new goal of the visualization.      

## Slide 7:
The final product. This visualization attempts to illustrate potential bright spots and dark spots. The corals near the middle between -15 and 15 degrees are bigger and brighter indicating possibly bright spots, while the corals +/-15 indicate dark spots. I decided to visualize the data and metrics which felt most natural and I also wanted to hide some of the complexity of the dissertation. Determinating causes of corals decline is not super clear, it is caused by both environmental variables, human impact, and has a lot of interconnected relationships. I wanted to stay as truthful to the dissertation's conclusions as I possibly could. Of course, working with research material, the conclusions and findings are sometimes a bit subtle and not neccessarily clear for non-experts like me - with the risk of my visualisation being too, the final product is what made sense to me.

I believe this visualization could live in a digital environment, being an article on a media site for e.g. a NGO with maritime or environmental focus, targetting mostly a grown up audience. It looks mostly visual at first, but actually has some depths in data encoding, and encourages the audience to explore the nuances of all the corals. 

## Reflections
Throughout the project, It was always easy for me to imagine the visuals itself, and I subconsciously put a lot of energy into the looks of the visualisations. I really struggled with conveying the right story of the data I worked with, and often ended up with a feeling that the visualizations did not tell me or the audience anything meaningful. I could still improve a lot of the design choices. While the visualization has the visual aspect (clustery, colorful, overwhelming) I wanted to archieve, I still feel the axis' are a somewhat off. (x,y) grids usually represents precise and unambigious information. While I do not believe my narrative requires precise locations in a grid, as the perspective is more on the overall tendancies, it still violates the use of coordinate systems. Although, it ended up like this and I am "ok" satisfied with the result.   